Anomaly feedback (#3761)
SkylineCommunications/dataminer-docs: user-guide/Basic_Functionality/Alarms/Working_with_alarms/Advanced_analytics_features/Behavioral_anomaly_detection.md

You can also configure alarm templates to have alarms generated instead of suggestion events, depending on the parameter and the type of anomaly. See [Configuring anomaly detection alarms for specific parameters](xref:Configuring_anomaly_detection_alarms).

> From DataMiner 10.3.0 [CU20]/10.4.0 [CU8]/10.4.11 onwards<!--RN 39945-->, you can [provide feedback on suggestion events](#providing-feedback-on-suggestion-events) generated by behavioral anomaly detection. This feedback helps DataMiner improve its ability to decide when to trigger suggestion events or alarms. Prior to DataMiner 10.3.0 [CU20]/10.4.0 [CU8]/10.4.11, only the change point history of a parameter is considered when labeling behavioral anomalies.

Reviewer: DataMiner 10.4.11/10.5.0

Author: ```suggestion
From DataMiner 10.4.11/10.5.0 onwards<!--RN 39945-->, you can [provide feedback on suggestion events](#providing-feedback-on-suggestion-events) generated by behavioral anomaly detection. This feedback helps DataMiner improve its ability to decide when to trigger suggestion events or alarms. Prior to DataMiner 10.3.0 [CU20]/10.4.0 [CU8]/10.4.11, only the change point history of a parameter is considered when labeling behavioral anomalies.
```

  - From DataMiner 10.2.11/10.3.0 onwards, suggestion events are only created for the most significant changes, and per hosting DataMiner Agent there can be at most 500 open suggestion events related to behavioral anomaly detection.
  - Prior to DataMiner 10.2.11/10.3.0, suggestion events are created for all anomalous behavioral changes that do not have alarm monitoring enabled.

## Providing feedback on suggestion events

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The anomaly feedback feature is in preview until DataMiner 10.4.11/10.5.0. If you use the preview version of the feature, its functionality may be different from what is described below. For more information, see [Soft-launch options](xref:SoftLaunchOptions).

The anomaly feedback feature is fully available from DataMiner 10.4.11/10.5.0 onwards<!--RN 39945-->. Prior to this, it is available in soft launch from DataMiner 10.4.4 onwards, if the soft-launch option [*AnomalyFeedback*](xref:Overview_of_Soft_Launch_Options#anomalyfeedback) is enabled<!--RN 38980 + 39944-->.

![Anomaly feedback feature](~/user-guide/images/Anomaly_Feedback.png)<br>*Alarm Console in DataMiner 10.4.11*

> Whenever behavioral anomaly detection triggers a suggestion event, you can provide feedback (positive or negative) on it in the Alarm Console. Regularly providing feedback helps anomaly detection learn from it on a system-wide level, with input from all users. This allows more accurate detection of which change points to mark as anomalies across the system<!--RN 39623-->. Feedback applies to the same parameter instance, other instances of the parameter, and other elements using the same protocol.

Reviewer: Whenever behavioral anomaly detection triggers a suggestion event **or alarm**

Author: ```suggestion
Whenever behavioral anomaly detection triggers a suggestion event or alarm, you can provide feedback (positive or negative) on it in the Alarm Console. Regularly providing feedback helps anomaly detection learn from it on a system-wide level, with input from all users. This allows more accurate detection of which change points to mark as anomalies across the system<!--RN 39623-->. Feedback applies to the same parameter instance, other instances of the parameter, and other elements using the same protocol.
```

> [!TIP]
> See also: [*Improving anomaly detection using feedback* tutorial](xref:Anomaly_Feedback_Tutorial)

### Prerequisites

- Behavioral anomaly detection is enabled, and all its [prerequisites](xref:Advanced_analytics_trending) are met.

- [Storage as a Service (STaaS)](xref:STaaS) or an [indexing database](xref:Supported_system_data_storage_architectures).

- The [time to live](xref:Specifying_TTL_overrides) for trending is at least 1 day for real-time trending and 1 month for minute records.

### Providing feedback

<!--RN 39640-->

To provide feedback:

1. In the Alarm Console, open the *Anomalies* or *Suggestion events* tab. See [Navigating the light bulb menu](xref:Light_Bulb_Feature#navigating-the-light-bulb-menu) and [Adding a tab](xref:ChangingTheAlarmConsoleLayout#adding-a-tab).

1. Verify that the ![Feedback](~/user-guide/images/Feedback_Column.png) column is visible. If it is not:

>    - Close the *Anomalies* or *Suggestion events* tab and reopen it. However, make sure not to use the *Reopen closed alarm lists* option. See [Adding a tab](xref:ChangingTheAlarmConsoleLayout#adding-a-tab).

Reviewer: It's nice to add this, as multiple people might run into this issue when first using it, but it is probably good to add when this might be necessary and why: it's only necessary if you recently upgraded from a version before feedback to a version with feedback, and you still had the tab open from before you upgraded. This is because Cube saves the opened tabs, with the columns in them and hence it will not add the new column to existing tabs.

Author: ```suggestion
   - Close the *Anomalies* or *Suggestion events* tab and reopen it. However, make sure not to use the *Reopen closed alarm lists* option. See [Adding a tab](xref:ChangingTheAlarmConsoleLayout#adding-a-tab).
   
    This step might be necessary if you have recently upgraded from a version of DataMiner that did not include the Feedback column to one that does (DataMiner 10.4.11/10.5.0 or higher). Since Cube saves your open tabs along with their column layout, the new column will not automatically appear in tabs that were open before the upgrade.
```

  - From DataMiner 10.4.0 [CU1]/10.4.4 onwards<!-- RN 38674 -->, at most 50 new suggestion events per hour per type of anomaly (i.e. level shift, trend change, flatline, or variance change) can be generated per DataMiner Agent. There is no limit to the maximum number of anomaly alarm events, i.e. alarm events for parameters that have explicit [anomaly alarm monitoring configured in the alarm template](xref:Configuring_anomaly_detection_alarms).
  - From DataMiner 10.2.11/10.3.0 onwards, suggestion events are only created for the most significant changes, and per hosting DataMiner Agent there can be at most 500 open suggestion events related to behavioral anomaly detection.
  - Prior to DataMiner 10.2.11/10.3.0, suggestion events are created for all anomalous behavioral changes that do not have alarm monitoring enabled.

> ## Providing feedback on behavioral anomalies

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it might not be better to add this section on a separate page. I know we're being a bit careful with adding new pages because of the page limit, but in this case I do think it would be a definite improvement.

Author: Agreed. I've added it as a separate page in [commit 06d609b](https://github.com/SkylineCommunications/dataminer-docs/pull/3761/commits/06d609bfe9d538af003719998837c77037d88f47).

1. Verify that the ![Feedback](~/user-guide/images/Feedback_Column.png) column is visible. If it is not:

   - Close the *Anomalies* or *Suggestion events* tab and reopen it. However, make sure not to use the *Reopen closed alarm lists* option. See [Adding a tab](xref:ChangingTheAlarmConsoleLayout#adding-a-tab).

     This step might be necessary if you have recently upgraded from a version of DataMiner that did not include the Feedback column to one that does (DataMiner 10.4.11/10.5.0 or higher). Since Cube saves your open tabs along with their column layout, the new column will not automatically appear in tabs that were open before the upgrade.

   - Ensure you are using DataMiner version 10.4.11/10.5.0 or higher, or confirm that the *AnomalyFeedback* option is included in the *SoftLaunchOptions.xml* file.

   - If possible, manually add the column by right-clicking the column headers and selecting *Add or remove columns* > *Actions* > *Feedback*.

1. Hover the mouse pointer over a suggestion event or alarm to view the ![Thumbs-up](~/user-guide/images/Thumbs_Up.png) and ![Thumbs-down](~/user-guide/images/Thumbs_Down.png) icons.

>    - If you approve of the anomaly and want to receive similar ones in the future, click the thumbs-up icon in the feedback column. Alternatively, you can right-click the suggestion event/alarm and select *Like*.
> 
>    - If you disapprove of the anomaly and do not wish to be notified of similar events in the future, click the thumbs-down icon. Alternatively, you can right-click the suggestion event/alarm and select *Dislike*.

Reviewer 2: I think it might be better if we avoid "approve of the anomaly" and "disapprove of the anomaly", as this sounds a bit odd: the anomaly in itself may not be what the user approves of, since it might point at something going wrong in their system.
```suggestion
   - If you want to be notified of similar anomalies in the future, click the thumbs-up icon in the feedback column. Alternatively, you can right-click the suggestion event/alarm and select *Like*.

   - If you do not want to be notified of similar events in the future, click the thumbs-down icon. Alternatively, you can right-click the suggestion event/alarm and select *Dislike*.
```

   Once selected, the chosen icon will be pinned in the column as a black icon. If you change your mind, you can click the other option, and only the final feedback will be registered<!--RN 39082-->.

   > [!NOTE]
   >
   > - The ![Thumbs-up](~/user-guide/images/Thumbs_Up.png) or ![Thumbs-down](~/user-guide/images/Thumbs_Down.png) icons will only appear for alarms or suggestion events generated by the behavioral anomaly detection feature.
   > - You can only see the feedback icons you have clicked yourself. Feedback from other users is not visible.

The feedback you provide will be taken into account in the future.

> Feedback on active alarms is saved in the user settings and will re-appear after closing and reopening Cube. Feedback on history alarms will disappear after restarting Cube, but it will still be used by SLAnalytics to improve the detection of future anomalies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Feedback on active alarms is saved in the user settings and will re-appear after Cube is closed and reopened. Feedback on history alarms will disappear after Cube is restarted, but it will still be used by SLAnalytics to improve the detection of future anomalies.
```

### Follow-up actions after providing feedback

> After providing feedback on a suggestion event or alarm, a light bulb icon may appear next to the ![Feedback](~/user-guide/images/Feedback_Column.png) column. Clicking this icon will reveal a follow-up action based on your feedback<!--RN 39809 + 39640 + 39480-->. Alternatively, you can right-click the suggestion event or alarm and select the follow-up action from the context menu.

Reviewer 2: If this only appears for the user who has provided the feedback, I'd suggest to adjust this as follows:
```suggestion
After you have provided feedback on a suggestion event or alarm, a light bulb icon may appear next to the ![Feedback](~/user-guide/images/Feedback_Column.png) column. Clicking this icon will reveal a follow-up action based on your feedback<!--RN 39809 + 39640 + 39480-->. Alternatively, you can right-click the suggestion event or alarm and select the follow-up action from the context menu.
```

| Action | Description |
|--|--|
| Clear event | Clears the suggestion event immediately. No confirmation box will appear. |
| Improve alarm template | Opens a pop-up window suggesting changes to the alarm template, based on previous feedback for the parameter. At the top of the window, you can see the element and parameter name, along with a link to relevant documentation<!--RN 39616-->. At the bottom, it shows which elements using the same alarm template will be affected by the suggested template changes<!--RN 39729-->. A clock button allows you to view the current anomaly template configuration<!--RN 39640-->. |
| Create alarm template | Opens a card to create a new alarm template from scratch. |

![Suggested actions](~/user-guide/images/Suggested_Actions.png)<br>*Alarm Console in DataMiner 10.4.11*

If you provide feedback on multiple suggestion events for the same parameter, an action will only be suggested for the last one you gave feedback on<!--RN 39640-->.

> [!NOTE]
>

> > - The actions listed above will only appear if you have the required permissions to perform them. For example, the system will not suggest updating the alarm template if you are not allowed to do so<!--RN 39480-->.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should mention the exact permissions here? That way we prevent questions about this.

Author: Added permissions in [commit 0464372](https://github.com/SkylineCommunications/dataminer-docs/pull/3761/commits/0464372e917723612ee45bc22bab1eba770d33e1)

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/daf61cef-c376-4312-89b4-faf8c12a2d05)

   - Close the *Anomalies* or *Suggestion events* tab and reopen it. However, make sure not to use the *Reopen closed alarm lists* option. See [Adding a tab](xref:ChangingTheAlarmConsoleLayout#adding-a-tab).

>     This step might be necessary if you have recently upgraded from a version of DataMiner that did not include the Feedback column to one that does (DataMiner 10.4.11/10.5.0 or higher). Since Cube saves your open tabs along with their column layout, the new column will not automatically appear in tabs that were open before the upgrade.

Reviewer: I think indentation isn't as intended here. This seems to be displayed as if outside the enumeration. I think if you add an extra space, it will should with the same indentation as the text above?

Author: Thanks for letting me know! This should now be fixed.
